

Development Office, take note: your share of my future meager earnings has taken a hit. Backpedaling on Dean of Admissions William R. Fitzsimmons ’67 claims that demolishing Early Action provided "a win for students in the bottom quarter and bottom half of the income distribution" Harvard has announced that it intends to scrap socioeconomic diversity in favor of reentering the feeding frenzy over the "most qualified" students via early admissions. Some of them might be---gasp---enrolling at Yale.

To examine the decision, let's take a trip down memory lane. Harvard established its Early Action program in 1976. College counselors at selective prep schools rejoiced. Marion Finbury, admissions counselor at Phillips Andover Academy gushed that the program will be "humane and marvelous" for the 50-odd students Phillips Andover sends to Harvard each year. But as early as thirty-five years ago, Harvard admissions officers understand the impact the move will have on the entering class. L. Fred Jewett '57, Dean of Admissions, expects a to see far fewer minorities in the early pool. Marvelous humaneness on offer to nervous students at a expensive prep school, on hold for minorities.

Twenty-five years pass during which early admissions are periodically debated along relatively static lines. In 2001, Richard Levin---then President of that school in New Haven---initiates a national conversation on early admissions programs. The Crimson differentiates between binding and non-binding early admissions programs, finding a way to praise Harvard and attack Yale. However, in 2006 Harvard surprises everyone by announcing the elimination of early admissions. Princeton and the University of Virginia follow suit. Harvard professors studying admissions describe the move as "a selfless act, not some stratagem to outmaneuver its rivals."

By 2008 The Crimson declares the experiment a success, partly due to 2012 admissions being both highly-competitive (7.1% admissions rate) and producing the most diverse Harvard class in history. Harvard admissions officers take to The Crimson to laud the change, declaring that "Harvard has begun a movement that will shape the conversation about access and affordability." Come 2011 and the experiment began is over. Dean of the Faculty Michael D. Smith declares that "offering an accelerated decision cycle for interested applicants will increase Harvard’s potential to attract top-caliber students."

For me, the story ends with confusion. Five years ago, admissions officers proclaimed that eliminating Early Action would benefit applicants from lower socioeconomic classes. Now that it is returning, they are claiming---wait for it---that the move is intended to benefit competitive applicants from lower socioeconomic classes: "many highly talented students, including some of the best-prepared low-income and underrepresented minority students, were choosing programs with an early-action option". Those two statements can't be true simultaneously, and I don't think so much changed to allow them to be true separated by five years. At the root of the confusion is a simple question: what are we trying to accomplish by admitting students to the College?

Harvard admissions is admittedly complex and no simple approach works in isolation. What if Harvard admitted only the best students based on past performance? Prepare yourself for a College full of students from wealthy families who spent four years at private schools preparing their admissions packets and taking SAT classes. Or maybe we should admit those students who are going have a positive impact on the world? Define "positive impact", develop a test to detect it and then get back to me. (Also notify the Development Office that we won't be receiving any more donations from Wall Street.) Should we attempt to field competitive sports teams and full orchestras? Prepare for a sudden interest in squash and the bassoon among college-savvy high schoolers. And what about a class that can broaden itself through racial and socioeconomic diversity? Great idea! But wait---does it conflict with our other goals?

At the end of the day, we have sixteen-hundred slots. How we parcel them out says a lot about who we are and what we value: "likely letters" for athletes, the "Z-list" for legacies. Many of our goals are conflicting and we can't do everything, which means we have to have a frank conversation about our priorities and the mission of this school. Without data and transparency, I don't know whether Early Action was a boon to equalizing access to Harvard or a bust. However, given the history of suspicion about such programs, I have to conclude that Harvard has decided that competing over top applicants is more important that broadening access to underrepresented groups.

That's sad because I'm not worried about losing students to Yale or Princeton or Dartmouth. Why should we? These are great schools where students receive transformative educations. I am worried about losing the students that might not have ever imagined Harvard---or Yale or Princeton or Stanford, or maybe any college---could be for them, pay for them, and transform them. It seems that zero-sum competition for over-prepared over-achievers has blinded us to a larger context where universities have a collective role to play in mobilizing education to combat rising economic inequality. For five years we were brave. What are we now?

Geoffrey Challen '02--'03 is a Resident Tutor at Eliot House. The views expressed are his and do not reflect official Harvard College policy. 
